READING PASSAGE 1
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 1-13, which are based on Reading Passage 1 below.

THE PROBLEMS OF GETTING 'HANGRY'
Many people get annoyed and impatient when they have an empty stomach. These are not people that I have absolutely no sympathy for. Usually, I'm far from being the sort of person who gets bad-tempered, and am a pretty pleasant person to be around. But several friends and family members who know me well have told me that my personality quickly changes if I miss a meal. I'm not the only person to suffer from this, of course, if 'suffer' is the right word. I don't want to sound as if I'm feeling sorry for myself, because like most people who probably feel 'hangry' on occasion, I never have to go without food for long. However, the word 'hangry' – a combination of the words 'hungry' and 'angry' – has been with us (in the English-speaking world at least) for a number of years now and gets the emotion across quite well. Recently, scientists have finally started doing proper research into how a lack of food can generate particular emotional responses, and what the consequences might be. In fact, from what they have discovered, it seems that being 'hangry' may well be a real medical issue, rather than something that shouldn't really bother us too much.
In 2022, Professor Viren Swami of Anglia Ruskin University in the UK, along with researchers in Malaysia and Austria, conducted experiments on 121 people aged between 18 and 60. Firstly, the volunteers were asked several questions to help build up a picture of their eating habits, and find out how frequent their meals were, how often they had snacks, how healthily they ate, and so on. Then, the volunteers were asked to keep a record of their emotional state as part of their daily routine, five times a day for three weeks. Most volunteers (81%) were women and came from a range of European countries. At each of the five daily periods, they were asked to simply record how hungry they were, choosing a number between 0 (not hungry at all) and 100 (very hungry), as well as to write down a similar number showing how angry they felt. In addition, the volunteers had to write down a number related to how they felt generally, from 0 (very unpleasant) to 100 (very pleasant), as well as a number related to their state of arousal, indicating how active they sensed they were. Finally, the volunteers were asked to write down how many hours had passed since they last ate a meal.
After the three-week experiment, the results were very clear. Unsurprisingly, the volunteers all reported having identical symptoms – feelings of anger and experiencing less pleasure – when they felt that they were hungry. There were a number of problems with the research, however. One was that it was impossible to tell if any of the volunteers actually had a physical need to eat when they reported feeling hungry (although it is likely that they knew their bodies well enough to know that they did). The other is that the volunteers were all from Europe. More research needs to be done on a more diverse range of people from a wider geographical area to get a clearer picture of whether we all have similar emotional responses when we don't eat regularly.
Professor Swami's research does not come up with any solutions to 'hanger', but he believes that it would be valuable to continue studying it. Swami would argue against the idea that 'hanger' is simply a problem of adults getting a bit impatient and unpleasant to be around just before lunchtime. Instead, he has suggested that children who miss meals such as breakfast, or do not have access to snacks or lunches during their school day may be more likely to have issues focusing on their studies, or may even display a higher number of behaviour problems. More research will need to be done on this in future, but Swami's study offers a chance to recognize that being 'hangry' is a genuine emotion, one that is felt by many people and is worthy of consideration. In turn, this could be a very useful step in making sure that all children have as good an education as possible.

Questions 1-5
Do the following statements agree with the views/claims of the writer in Reading Passage 1?
Next to each statement, write
YES if the statement agrees with the views/claims of the writer
NO if the statement contradicts the views/claims of the writer
NOT GIVEN if it is impossible to say what the writer thinks about this
1 People who feel 'hangry' are behaving in a way that is difficult to understand.
2 Most people who experience being 'hangry' do not have problems finding food.
3 'Hangry' is a useful way of describing what happens when we go without food.
4 There has been a lot of useful research into the issue of being 'hangry'.
5 Most people now understand that being 'hangry' is an important issue.
Questions 6-11
Complete the notes below.
Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.
RESEARCH INTO 'HANGER'
An early part of the experiment involved getting a better understanding the 6............................... of a set of volunteers aged 18-60.
Volunteers were then invited to keep a regular diary showing what their 7............................... was over a three-week period.
Using a simple measurement system, volunteers described how 8............................... they felt, as well as how hungry or angry. They also had to record when their most recent 9............................... was.
Results showed that volunteers had the same 10............................... in relation to a lack of food.
One issue with the research was that volunteers had all come from the same 11..............................., and further research could focus on a more diverse group of people.
Questions 12 and 13
Choose TWO letters, A-E.
Which TWO of the following statements are true of Professor Swami's research?
A It gives us clear ways to tackle the problem of 'hanger'.
B It should be seen as an early stage in studying the wider effects of 'hanger'.
C It shows us why 'hanger' is not a problem that adults need to worry about.
D It shows a clear link between hunger and poor performance at school.
E It helps us understand that being 'hangry' is a real emotional state.

READING PASSAGE 2
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 14-26, which are based on Reading Passage 2 below.

THE PACIFIC NORTHWEST TREE OCTOPUS
A
It is extremely common for people to turn to the internet to learn about what is happening in the world. This is increasingly true of teenagers, who may well go on to use online information (along with more traditional sources such as textbooks) for their studies when they later enter college. Information literacy – the ability to understand whether a text, article or news story is composed of reliable facts – is very important at university level. However, according to some research, there is worrying evidence that many of us often accept the information we read at face value. In other words, we often seem to trust what we are reading without really asking questions about who wrote it and why.
B
In 1998, a writer going by the name of Lyle Zapato set up a detailed and quite sophisticated website which seemed to give information about the Pacific Northwest Tree Octopus. According to the website (which still exists), this apparently shy animal can only be found in the vast forests of the north-western USA. Reaching a size of 33 centimetres, it is as happy jumping from branch to branch as it is in the normal octopus home of water. However, because of the Tree Octopus's natural habitats being cut down, and other threats such as eagles and cats, their numbers are low, and they are at risk of dying out completely. The website suggests that people help protect the octopus by writing to celebrities to take action, or even by going on Tree Octopus awareness marches.
C
The Tree Octopus has never existed, of course, and the website contains nothing more than fake information. It has, however, been used in a number of interesting experiments. In 2007 and 2017, two separate ones were done on school pupils aged 11-13 in the US and the Netherlands. They were either asked to summarize the most important information from the website in a few sentences or were asked questions to test whether they understood the information about the Tree Octopus. After further questions, it was found in the American study that only 11% thought the website was in any way suspicious. In the Dutch study, a similarly low number (7%) thought the same. It is possible that the rather emotional topic of the website (an animal in danger) could have made it appear more reliable than it really was.
D
These results may not be too surprising. It could be argued that as long ago as 2007 – or even 2017 – the idea of 'fake news' was much less widely known about than it is now. Even today, we should probably not be astonished if 11-year-olds have little awareness of unreliable information online compared to older teenagers who have started university and have more experience of the internet. For that reason, many of us might not be too worried about children being deceived by what they see on the internet. It could even be argued that no one as young as 11 should even be spending much time online.
E
In 2020, however, a new experiment was carried out on a group of first-year university students in the US studying biology – the type of people who would be expected to have developed the intelligence to know what is objective information and what is not. In one task, the students were asked to visit the website of the Pacific Northwest Tree Octopus as part of a project on 'interesting organisms'. As part of a first task, they were asked to use the website to find out the scientific name of the octopus, where it lived and why this species was at risk. Interestingly, at this point, 90% of students failed to recognize that the octopus – and the whole website – was a carefully crafted joke. In a follow-up task, the students were shown a video which made it clear that the octopus was a comedy invention and were then asked what they thought about the initial task. The vast majority now saw the website for what it was, making such comments as, 'I answered the questions without giving them much thought,' or 'I didn't think it was necessary to find any extra evidence about this animal.'
F
As studies like these suggest, even science students can be influenced by fake news, and could benefit from developing their critical-thinking skills. Given this, it is probably sensible to start teaching young teenagers about the nature of online information as soon as they are allowed to access it. They should – at the very least – know that there is much that is inaccurate, if not deliberately designed to make us believe something which is untrue. But perhaps more importantly, they should be encouraged to continually ask themselves questions about what they find online. Rather than learning to rely on a single source of information, we should all be taught to read up on important subjects and check for additional evidence, if necessary, rather than simply accepting something as soon as we see it.

Questions 14-19
Reading Passage 2 has six paragraphs, A-F.
Choose the correct heading for each paragraph from the list of headings below.
List of Headings
i Most children trust online information
ii Recommendations for schools
iii The usefulness of online information
iv Smarter people can be fooled, too
v Don't expect children to understand the internet
vi Reasons for creating 'fake news'
vii A strange creature
viii The earliest example of 'fake news'
ix Why 'fake news' is aimed at children
14 Paragraph A
15 Paragraph B
16 Paragraph C
17 Paragraph D
18 Paragraph E
19 Paragraph F
Questions 20-23
Complete the summary below.
Choose NO MORE THAN TWO WORDS from the passage for each answer.
As more of us use the internet, 20............................... is becoming an increasingly important skill so that we don't just take what we see at face value. To illustrate the fact that many young people still need to develop this skill, experiments have used a website about the Pacific Northwest Tree Octopus. Unusually, this creature is said to be found in forests. Despite this, and an invitation to encourage 21............................... to protect the animal, few children in the studies found the website to be at all 22............................... One reason for this may be because of the 23............................... it centred around.
Questions 24-26
Choose the correct letter, A, B, C or D.
24 The writer suggests that the 2007 and 2017 experiments aren't a cause for concern because
A information directed at teenagers did not tend to be false then.
B children should not be expected to decide what is real online.
C most online information was more reliable in those days.
D very young people do not spend much time on the internet.
25 The writer claims that the biology students in 2020
A should have been more aware of information based on real facts.
B were unable to understand the information in the website.
C never realized the true nature of the website.
D were prevented from doing their own research about the octopus.
26 According to the writer, what should young people learn?
A to ask about the best places to find information online
B that everything they see needs to be checked for accuracy
C to know what source of information they should depend on
D that some online content is designed to mislead us

READING PASSAGE 3
You should spend about 20 minutes on Questions 27-40, which are based on Reading Passage 3 below.

A GOOD NIGHT'S SLEEP
Are you having trouble getting the seven to nine hours' sleep each night that many experts insist on? More and more commonly, the blame for this is placed firmly on modern technology. It is often pointed out that too many of us are taking our phones (or even laptops) to bed with us (even if we've spent much of our working day looking at them), spending extra time scrolling up and down, catching up with an endless stream of news or gossip instead of focusing on falling asleep. Solutions to tackle the problem of a lack of quality sleep are often technological, too. Phone screens or monitors might come with an optional 'night mode', with less of the blue light that is said to keep our brains active. Or you might invest in devices that play the gentle noise of rain falling or waves hitting a shore. There are even 'anti-anxiety' apps that choose relaxing stories for you to listen to at bedtime.
Despite all this, it is possible that even if we lived with a complete absence of modern technology, including electricity, the result would probably not be that we slept longer throughout the night. In fact, the idea that we all need to get the amount of uninterrupted sleep that some experts advise us to have seems in itself to be a modern invention, and one that perhaps ought to be challenged.
Jerome Siegel, a neurobiologist at the University of California, has studied three groups of people separated by thousands of miles across Africa and South America. One was the Tsimane, a hunter-gatherer tribe (meaning that they only eat whatever they are able to catch or find in the wild) of between 20 and 30 families living in the Amazon rainforests of Bolivia. Also studied were the Hazda people of Tanzania, and the San people of Namibia. Like the Tsimane, neither of these African tribes make use of electricity, let alone artificial lighting.
On Siegel's request, members of each tribe put small gadgets on their wrists which recorded every small movement they made. Among all the people studied, it was noticed that on average, people fell asleep (and stopped moving so much) several hours after sunset. People from the Tsimane and Hazda tribes tended to wake an hour before sunrise. San tribe-members woke up some time after the sun had risen.
For all the people studied, the hours after sunset are a valuable time for catching up with each other's news after a meal around a fire, sharing stories and other information, and planning ahead for the future. During the day, they are likely to work hard in finding or preparing food, but the night is the time when tribe-members reconnect and chat. Perhaps this happens in much the same way that any of us feel the need to look at social media or news sites at the end of a day.
This period of activity after dark helped researchers to notice that sunlight was not the most important thing for tribe members when it came to going to sleep and waking up again. Instead of aiming for bed as soon as the sun goes down, tribe members seem to naturally go to sleep when temperatures drop to a certain point, waking up when the air becomes warmer again. The San tribe of Namibia notably tend to get up an hour after the sun has risen, probably due to the fact that the area where they live experiences colder temperatures in the morning. On average, members of all three tribes have between five and seven hours of sleep each day. Moreover, they do not seem to suffer from any of the symptoms of lack of sleep. They do not take naps, and two of the tribes have no understanding of – let alone a word for – the concept of insomnia (the condition of not being able to sleep).
This research suggests that it is not true that if we had less technology surrounding us, we would definitely sleep more. In fact, the opposite could be true. In future, perhaps we will see more in the way of innovative gadgets that control the temperature of our bedrooms, closely monitored in order for us to get a perfect night's sleep. Until then, perhaps a useful course of action would be to spend our evenings after dark relaxing as much as we possibly can, rather than worrying about how much sleep we ought to get.

Questions 27 and 28
Choose TWO letters, A-F.
The list below contains some of the reasons why people might be unable to get to sleep at night.
Which TWO reasons are mentioned by the writer of the text?
A having too much work
B reading too much information
C too much stress
D other people talking
E a noisy environment
F a certain type of light
Questions 29-33
Complete each sentence with the correct ending, A-G, below.
29 People who decide to live without modern technology are unlikely to
30 The writer explains that hunter-gatherer tribes
31 When it comes to recommended amounts of sleep, we should
32 For the experiment, each person was asked to
33 Siegel found that most of his research subjects tended to
A move less than normal.
B go to bed long after the fall of darkness.
C question how much sleep is really necessary.
D only use a simple form of artificial lighting.
E wear special devices.
F have improved sleep.
G have a limited diet.
Questions 34-40
Do the following statements agree with the information given in Reading Passage 3?
Write
TRUE if the statement agrees with the information
FALSE if the statement contradicts the information
NOT GIVEN if there is no information on this
34 Tribe members tended to do little after dark.
35 The daytime is when tribe members are less active.
36 The most common time to use social media is in the evenings.
37 How cool it is plays an important role in when tribe members go to sleep.
38 All the tribe members in the research wake up at a very similar time.
39 Tribe members reported no problems with the amount of sleep they had.
40 The writer recommends using technology to help get a better night's sleep.

Answers:

1 NO

2 YES

3 YES

4 NO

5 NOT GIVEN

6 eating habits

7 emotional state

8 active

9 meal

10 symptoms

11 geographical area

12&13 B, E

14 iii

15 vii

16 i

17 v

18 vi

19 ii

20 information literacy

21 celebrities

22 suspicious

23 emotional topic

24 B

25 A

26 D

27&28 B, F

29 F

30 G

31 C

32 E

33 B

34 FALSE

35 FALSE

36 NOT GIVEN

37 TRUE

38 FALSE

39 TRUE

40 FALSE
